add deprecation chapter (#1850)
plone/documentation: docs/backend/deprecation.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description": "A guide how to do depracations, including Python, ZCML and templates in Plone."
    "property=og:description": "A guide how to do depracations, including Python, ZCML and templates in Plone."
    "property=og:title": "Deprecation"
    "keywords": "depracation, zcml, template, jbot"
---

(backend-deprecation-label)=
# Deprecation

## Introduction

This document describes rationales, configuration and best practices of deprecations in Plone, Zope and Python.
It is meant as a styleguide on how to apply deprecations in Plone core packages.
It also has a value as a general overview on how to deprecate in Python.

### Why Deprecation

At some point we

- need to get rid of old code,
- want to unify api style (consistent api),
- fix typos in namings,
- move code or templates around (inside package or to another package).

While refactoring code, moving modules, functions, classes and methods is often needed.
To not break third party code imports from the old place or usage of old functions/ methods must work for while.
Deprecated methods are usually removed with the next major release of Plone.

> Following the [semantic versioning guideline](http://semver.org) is recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Following the [semantic versioning guideline](http://semver.org) is recommended.
```

    pass
```

### Deprecating a GenericSetup profile

Starting with GenericSetup 1.8.2 (part of Plone > 5.0.2) the `post_handler` attribute in ZCML can be used to call a function after the profile was applied.
We use this feature to issue a warning.

First we register the same profile twice. Under the new name and under the old name:

```xml
<genericsetup:registerProfile
    name="default"
    title="My Fance Package"
    directory="profiles/default"
    description="..."
    provides="Products.GenericSetup.interfaces.EXTENSION"
    />

<genericsetup:registerProfile
    name="some_confusing_name"
    title="My Fance Package (deprecated)"
    directory="profiles/some_confusing_name"
    description="... (use profile default instaed)"
    provides="Products.GenericSetup.interfaces.EXTENSION"
    post_handler=".setuphandlers.deprecate_profile_some_confusing_name"
    />
```

And in `setuphandlers.py` add a function:

```python
import warnings

def deprecate_profile_some_confusing_name(tool):
    warnings.warn(
        'The profile with id "some_confusing_name" was renamed to "default".',
        DeprecationWarning
    )
```

### Deprecating a template position

> Sometimes we need to move templates to new locations. Since addons often use jbot to override templates by their position, we need to point them to the new position as well as make sure that the override still works with the old position.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes we need to move templates to new locations. Since addons often use [z3c.jbot](https://github.com/zopefoundation/z3c.jbot) to override templates by their position, we need to point them to the new position as well as make sure that the override still works with the old position.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

To deprecate a package:

```

> In the old package folders `__init__.py` we add a mapping dict with the name `jbot_deprecations` of old and new template location:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the old package folders `__init__.py` add a dictionary `jbot_deprecations` that maps the old template locations to their new counterparts, e.g.:
```

```python
jbot_deprecations = {
    "plone.locking.browser.info.pt": "plone.app.layout.viewlets.info.pt"
}
```

> add a jbot-deprecations config to the `configure.zcml` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add this deprecation snippet to the package `configure.zcml` file:
```

> create a `jbot_deprecations.zcml` file:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```{code-block} xml
:emphasize-lines: 6,9-12
:linenos:

<configure
    xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope"

>     xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    xmlns:browser="http://namespaces.zope.org/browser"

>     xmlns:browser="http://namespaces.zope.org/browser"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    xmlns:zcml="http://namespaces.zope.org/zcml"
    >

>   <configure zcml:condition="have jbot-deprecations">
>     <include package="z3c.jbot" file="meta.zcml" />
>     <browser:jbotDeprecated dictionary=".jbot_deprecations" />
>   </configure>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <include
      zcml:condition="installed z3c.jbot"
      package="z3c.jbot" 
      file="meta.zcml" 
      />
  <browser:jbotDeprecated
      zcml:condition="have jbot-deprecations"
      dictionary=".jbot_deprecations"
      />
```

Reviewer: I think that the `meta.zcml` has to be loaded before checking the feature. If we have the `jbot-deprecations` feature, it means the meta has been already loaded.

CC @mauritsvanrees

</configure>
```

> this will load the defined `jbot_deprecations` dictionary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `z3c.jbot` version that supports deprecation is found, trying to override the template with the old location will trigger a deprecation warning that will instruct the user to rename its override file.
```

---
myst:
  html_meta:

>     "description": "A guide how to do depracations, including Python, ZCML and templates in Plone."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "description": "A guide how to do deprecations, including Python, ZCML and templates in Plone."
```

>     "property=og:description": "A guide how to do depracations, including Python, ZCML and templates in Plone."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "property=og:description": "A guide how to do deprecations, including Python, ZCML and templates in Plone."
```

    "property=og:title": "Deprecation"

>     "keywords": "depracation, zcml, template, jbot"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "keywords": "deprecation, zcml, template, jbot"
```

---

(backend-deprecation-label)=
# Deprecation

## Introduction

This document describes rationales, configuration and best practices of deprecations in Plone, Zope and Python.
It is meant as a styleguide on how to apply deprecations in Plone core packages.
It also has a value as a general overview on how to deprecate in Python.

### Why Deprecation

> At some point we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At some point we:
```

- need to get rid of old code,

> - want to unify api style (consistent api),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- want to unify API style (consistent API),
```

Reviewer: I saw below in other parts of the document that `API`, was uppercased.
For consistency I would always use it uppercased.
I also think it is more correct to have it uppercased.

- fix typos in namings,
- move code or templates around (inside package or to another package).

While refactoring code, moving modules, functions, classes and methods is often needed.
To not break third party code imports from the old place or usage of old functions/ methods must work for while.
Deprecated methods are usually removed with the next major release of Plone.

Following the [semantic versioning guideline](http://semver.org) is recommended.

### Help Programmers, No annoyance

Deprecation has to support the consumers of the code - the programmers using it.
From their point of view, Plone core code is an API to them.
Any change is annoying to them anyway, but they feel better if deprecation warnings are telling them what to do.

Deprecations must always log at level *warning* and have to answers the question:

**"Why is the code gone from the old place? What to do instead?"**

A short message is enough., i.e.:

- "Replaced by new API xyz, found at abc.cde".,
- "Moved to xyz, because of abc.",
- "Name had a typo, new name is "xyz".

All logging has to be done once, i.e. on first usage or first import.
It must not flood the logs.

### Use Cases

Renaming

> : We may want to rename classes, methods, functions or global or class variables in order to get a more consistent api or because of a typo, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: We may want to rename classes, methods, functions or global or class variables in order to get a more consistent API or because of a typo, etc.
```

  We never just rename, we always provide a deprecated version logging a verbose deprecation warning with information where to
  import from in future.

Moving a module, class, function, etc to another place

> : For some reason, i.e. merging packages, consistent api or resolving cirular import problems, we need to move code around.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: For some reason, i.e. merging packages, consistent API or resolving cirular import problems, we need to move code around.
```

Deprecation of a whole package

: A whole package (folder with `__init__.py`)

  - all imports still working, logging deprecation warnings on first import
  - ZCML still exists, but is empty (or includes the zcml from the new place if theres no auto import (i.e. for meta.zcml).

Deprecation of a whole python egg

: We will provide a last major release with no 'real' code, only backward compatible (bbb) imports of public API are provided.
  This will be done the way described above for a whole package.
  The README clearly states why it was moved and where to find the code now.

Deprecation of a GenericSetup profile

: They may got renamed for consistency or are superfluos after an update.
  Code does not need to break to support this.

## Enable Deprecation Warnings

### Zope

Zope does configure logging and warnings, so the steps below (under section Python) are not needed.

Using `plone.recipe.zope2instance` add the option `deprecation-warnings = on` to the buildouts `[instance]` section.

```ini
[buildout]
parts = instance

[instance]
recipe = plone.recipe.zope2instance
...
deprecation-warnings = on
...
```

> This just sets a configuration option in `zope.conf`.

Reviewer 2: For non buildout users, could be interesting to have the zope.conf snippet available here, if possible.

> This just sets a configuration option in `zope.conf`.

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion
This adds this line to the `zope.conf` file:

```
debug-mode on
```
~~~

Or maybe add these lines above and then say that buildout user can have this with the proper recipe settings.

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description": "A guide how to do deprecations, including Python, ZCML and templates in Plone."
    "property=og:description": "A guide how to do deprecations, including Python, ZCML and templates in Plone."
    "property=og:title": "Deprecation"
    "keywords": "deprecation, zcml, template, jbot"
---

(backend-deprecation-label)=
# Deprecation

## Introduction

This document describes rationales, configuration and best practices of deprecations in Plone, Zope and Python.
It is meant as a styleguide on how to apply deprecations in Plone core packages.
It also has a value as a general overview on how to deprecate in Python.

### Why Deprecation

At some point we:

- need to get rid of old code,
- want to unify API style (consistent API),
- fix typos in namings,
- move code or templates around (inside package or to another package).

While refactoring code, moving modules, functions, classes and methods is often needed.
To not break third party code imports from the old place or usage of old functions/ methods must work for while.
Deprecated methods are usually removed with the next major release of Plone.

> Following the [semantic versioning guideline](http://semver.org) is recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the [semantic versioning guideline](https://semver.org) is recommended.
```

### Help Programmers, No annoyance

> Deprecation has to support the consumers of the code - the programmers using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The developers should use code deprecations to support the consumers of the code.
```

Any change is annoying to them anyway, but they feel better if deprecation warnings are telling them what to do.

Deprecations must always log at level *warning* and have to answers the question:

**"Why is the code gone from the old place? What to do instead?"**

A short message is enough., i.e.:

- "Replaced by new API xyz, found at abc.cde".,
- "Moved to xyz, because of abc.",
- "Name had a typo, new name is "xyz".

All logging has to be done once, i.e. on first usage or first import.
It must not flood the logs.

### Use Cases

Renaming

: We may want to rename classes, methods, functions or global or class variables in order to get a more consistent API or because of a typo, etc.
  We never just rename, we always provide a deprecated version logging a verbose deprecation warning with information where to
  import from in future.

Moving a module, class, function, etc to another place

: For some reason, i.e. merging packages, consistent API or resolving cirular import problems, we need to move code around.
  When imported from the old place it logs a verbose deprecation warning with information where to import from in future.

Deprecation of a whole package

> : A whole package (folder with `__init__.py`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: A whole [package](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#packages)
```

  - all imports still working, logging deprecation warnings on first import
  - ZCML still exists, but is empty (or includes the zcml from the new place if theres no auto import (i.e. for meta.zcml).

> Deprecation of a whole python egg

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Deprecation of a whole released/ installable package.
```

: We will provide a last major release with no 'real' code, only backward compatible (bbb) imports of public API are provided.
  This will be done the way described above for a whole package.
  The README clearly states why it was moved and where to find the code now.

Deprecation of a GenericSetup profile

: They may got renamed for consistency or are superfluos after an update.
  Code does not need to break to support this.

> 

Reviewer 4: Everything up to this point is a Conceptual Guide, and needs to be split into a separate file placed in the `conceptual-guides` directory.

Everything after this point is a How-to Guide and should be moved under  [Developer guide](https://6.docs.plone.org/developer-guide/index.html). This section is a recent addition, and more suitable for this content.
